scene from my earliest days as a reporter. On a Friday afternoon, people queue outside a newsagents in one of the poorer areas of a London borough to await the arrival of their weekly newspaper. Some applaud as I heave bundles of Barking Advertisers (now defunct, became the Barking Recorder in 1992 and was later merged into the Barking & Dagenham Post) from the back of my Morris Minor convertible and hand them to a shop owner fuming at my late arrival. In the rear mirror, I spot people leaving the shop, heads bowed as they scan the paper.

I can still remember how delighted I was as I drove on to deliver to the next shop. That issue contained my words – news stories from attending court, paragraphs culled from council minutes, and one of my first columns. Such public enthusiasm for my work! What a triumphant justification for the journalistic trade I had joined months before.

Why was I delivering newspapers as well as writing for them? To enhance my meagre wages. Back in the office an hour later, after finishing my round, I was brought down to earth.
Read all about it? How local papers' decline is starving communities of news
Read more

My amused older colleagues told me that those people who were so anxious to get their hands on the paper were not at all interested in my story about a town hall dispute over housing allocation nor my “exclusive” about a new band to rival Brian Poole and the Tremeloes. In fact, they were desperate to get hold of bargains among the goods for offer in the classified advertising pages.

At first, I refused to believe it. But a visit the following week to the newsagent confirmed what my more experienced colleagues had told me. “They always go straight to the small ads,” he said. “I’d be amazed if they read much more.”

It was a hard lesson in reality, one which I chose to ignore at the time and one which, more than 50 years later, offers an insight into the problems facing local journalism.

The first factor to consider is social class. There never has been a monolithic working class and the splits, particularly between the haves and have-nots, which have widened over the course of five decades, were evident in the mid-1960s.

Although Barking was an overwhelmingly working-class borough, there were no queues to get an early sight of the local paper in what were regarded as better-off areas.

The second truth, an uncomfortable one for journalists then and now, is the falsity of our presumption that there is a hunger for information among the people we affect to serve.

I am not denying that there was a healthy level of civic engagement in Barking and Dagenham, all of which was more than adequately reported in our newspaper, but sales were hard to come by.

It was clear that journalism, by which I mean the journalistic content we believe to be of public benefit, was a very hard sell. That was hardly a new revelation.